.TH IOTOP 8 "October 2025" "iotop 0.1.8" "System Administration"
.SH NAME
iotop \- display I/O usage of processes
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B iotop
[\fIOPTIONS\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B iotop
is a tool to monitor I/O usage information output by the Linux kernel (requires 2.6.20 or later).
It displays a table of current I/O usage by processes or threads on the system, showing the bandwidth
of read and write operations for each process. The display is updated in real time and is similar
in concept to the
.BR top (1)
command.
.PP
This is a Rust implementation of iotop, providing improved performance and reliability while
maintaining compatibility with the original Python version.
.PP
.B iotop
requires root privileges to access the kernel's taskstats interface via netlink.
Alternatively, you can grant the CAP_NET_ADMIN capability to the binary:
.PP
.RS
sudo setcap cap_net_admin+eip /path/to/iotop
.RE
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-o ", " \-\-only
Only show processes or threads actually doing I/O, instead of showing all processes or threads.
This is useful to avoid cluttering the display with processes that are not performing any I/O operations.
.TP
.BR \-P ", " \-\-processes
Only show processes. By default, iotop shows all threads. This option aggregates I/O by process,
hiding individual threads.
.TP
.BR \-a ", " \-\-accumulated
Show accumulated I/O instead of bandwidth. In this mode, the tool displays the total amount
of I/O (reads and writes) done by each process since iotop started, instead of the current
I/O bandwidth.
.TP
.BR \-d ", " \-\-delay " \fISECONDS\fR"
Set the delay between iterations in seconds (accepts decimal values). Default is 1.0 second.
Higher values result in less frequent updates but lower CPU usage.
.TP
.BR \-n ", " \-\-iter " \fINUMBER\fR"
Set the number of iterations before quitting. By default, iotop runs indefinitely.
This is useful for batch mode or collecting a specific number of samples.
.TP
.BR \-b ", " \-\-batch
Run in batch mode (non-interactive). In this mode, iotop outputs text suitable for
parsing or logging, rather than a full-screen interactive display. Output goes to stdout.
Useful for scripting or redirecting to a file.
.TP
.BR \-p ", " \-\-pid " \fIPID\fR"
Monitor only the specified process ID(s). This option can be repeated to monitor multiple processes.
Threads of the specified process are also monitored.
.TP
.BR \-u ", " \-\-user " \fIUSERNAME\fR"
Monitor only processes belonging to the specified user(s). The argument can be either a username
or a numeric UID. This option can be repeated to monitor multiple users.
.TP
.BR \-t ", " \-\-time
Add a timestamp on each line in batch mode (implies \fB\-\-batch\fR). The timestamp format is HH:MM:SS.
.TP
.BR \-q ", " \-\-quiet
Suppress column names and summary statistics (implies \fB\-\-batch\fR). Only process lines are printed.
Useful for minimal output in scripts.
.TP
.BR \-k ", " \-\-kilobytes
Use kilobytes instead of human-friendly units. Displays all values in KB/s (bandwidth) or KB (accumulated).
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Display help information and exit.
.SH INTERACTIVE KEYS
The following keys are recognized in interactive mode:
.TP
.BR q ", " Q
Quit the program.
.TP
.BR Ctrl+C
Quit the program.
.TP
.BR o ", " O
Toggle showing only processes doing I/O (same as \fB\-\-only\fR).
.TP
.BR a ", " A
Toggle between showing bandwidth and accumulated I/O (same as \fB\-\-accumulated\fR).
.TP
.BR p ", " P
Toggle between showing all threads and only processes (same as \fB\-\-processes\fR).
.TP
.BR r ", " R
Reverse the sorting order.
.TP
.BR Space
Pause/resume updating the display.
.TP
.BR Left ", " Right
Change the sorting column.
.TP
.BR Up ", " Down
Scroll the process list up or down by one line.
.TP
.BR PageUp ", " PageDown
Scroll the process list up or down by 10 lines.
.TP
.BR Home
Jump to the first sorting column, or with Ctrl, scroll to the top of the list.
.TP
.BR End
Jump to the last sorting column, or with Ctrl, scroll to the bottom of the list.
.TP
.BR Mouse " scroll"
Scroll the process list up or down by 3 lines using the mouse wheel.
.SH COLUMNS
The following columns are displayed:
.TP
.B TID
Thread ID (if showing threads) or Process ID (if showing processes with \fB\-P\fR).
.TP
.B PRIO
I/O priority class and level. Format is class/level. Classes: rt (realtime), be (best-effort), idle.
.TP
.B USER
Username of the process owner.
.TP
.B DISK READ
Disk read bandwidth (in human-readable format or KB/s if \fB\-k\fR is used), or accumulated
reads if \fB\-a\fR is specified.
.TP
.B DISK WRITE
Disk write bandwidth (in human-readable format or KB/s if \fB\-k\fR is used), or accumulated
writes if \fB\-a\fR is specified. This is the actual I/O written to disk, excluding writes
that were cancelled (e.g., truncated files).
.TP
.B SWAPIN
Percentage of time the process was waiting for swap-in (only available if CONFIG_TASK_DELAY_ACCT
is enabled in the kernel).
.TP
.B IO
Percentage of time the process was waiting for I/O (block I/O delays). Only available if
CONFIG_TASK_DELAY_ACCT is enabled in the kernel.
.TP
.B COMMAND
Command line of the process.
.SH REQUIREMENTS
.B iotop
requires:
.IP \(bu 2
Linux kernel 2.6.20 or later
.IP \(bu 2
Kernel I/O accounting support (CONFIG_TASK_IO_ACCOUNTING)
.IP \(bu 2
Kernel taskstats interface (CONFIG_TASKSTATS)
.IP \(bu 2
Kernel delay accounting (CONFIG_TASK_DELAY_ACCT) - optional but recommended for SWAPIN and IO columns
.IP \(bu 2
Delay accounting must be enabled: \fBsysctl kernel.task_delayacct=1\fR
.IP \(bu 2
VM event counters (CONFIG_VM_EVENT_COUNTERS)
.PP
Root privileges or CAP_NET_ADMIN capability are required to access the taskstats interface.
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Run iotop interactively with default settings:
.B sudo iotop
.TP
Show only processes currently doing I/O:
.B sudo iotop \-o
.TP
Run in batch mode, 5 iterations, 2 second delay:
.B sudo iotop \-b \-n 5 \-d 2
.TP
Monitor specific process and show only processes (not threads):
.B sudo iotop \-p 1234 \-P
.TP
Monitor all processes of a specific user:
.B sudo iotop \-u www-data
.TP
Batch mode with timestamps and quiet output:
.B sudo iotop \-tq \-n 10 > iotop.log
.TP
Show accumulated I/O instead of bandwidth:
.B sudo iotop \-a
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /proc/[pid]/io
Per-process I/O statistics.
.TP
.I /proc/[pid]/stat
Per-process status information.
.TP
.I /proc/[pid]/status
Per-process status details including Tgid and Uid.
.TP
.I /proc/[pid]/cmdline
Process command line.
.TP
.I /proc/vmstat
Virtual memory statistics.
.SH NOTES
The Total DISK READ and Total DISK WRITE values represent the total bandwidth of I/O from all
monitored processes, while the Actual DISK READ and Actual DISK WRITE values show the actual
I/O going to/from the block devices (these can differ due to caching).
.PP
If delay accounting is not available (SWAPIN and IO columns show "?unavailable?"), you may need
to enable it with:
.PP
.RS
sudo sysctl -w kernel.task_delayacct=1
.RE
.PP
Or add \fBkernel.task_delayacct=1\fR to \fI/etc/sysctl.conf\fR to make it persistent.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR top (1),
.BR ps (1),
.BR pidstat (1),
.BR iostat (1),
.BR vmstat (8),
.BR htop (1)
.SH BUGS
Report bugs at: https://github.com/AndPuQing/iotop/issues
.SH AUTHOR
.B iotop
was written by PuQing.
.PP
This is a Rust reimplementation of the original Python iotop by Guillaume Chazarain.
.PP
Original Python version: http://guichaz.free.fr/iotop/
.br
Upstream C version: https://github.com/Tomas-M/iotop
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 2025 PuQing
.PP
This is free software; see the source for copying conditions. There is NO warranty; not even
for MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.
.PP
Released under the MIT License.
